and they don't use the damn drug. And
it's the drug is so powerful and if you
use it according to press pulse
concepts, you'll get really good results
for the majority of people. Nobody is
targeting glucose and glutamine
simultaneously while placing the patient
in nutritional ketosis.
Hello everyone, this is Felix, your
friendly neighborhood kidney, coming
back again for episode number 14. It is
I have an amazing interview for you. It
might be one of the most important
interviews that you hear this year if
you are concerned with PKD.
This interview is with Professor Thomas
Seaff Freed. Professor Seaff is the main
voice out there for the metabolic theory
of cancer. And as you will notice in our
conversation, there is a lot of
similarities between the metabolic
theory of cancer and the pathogenesis of
PKD. In fact, Professor Seaff Freed's
work was what initially tipped me off
towards the Warberg effect and the
dependence of cystic tissue on glucose.
Now, a couple years after I stumbled
upon Professor Seaff Freed's work, he
actually added a new facet to this
metabolic theory of cancer, which is
that cancer cells don't just need
glucose to ferment, but they can also
use something else to make their energy,
and it is glutamine. In this discussion
with professor Seaff freed I will draw
the parallels between cancer and PKD and
you will hear that in PKD we actually
have studies showing the same mechanism.
This means that inhibiting glucose with
a ketogenic diet can be enough for some
people, but for some other people, it
might not be enough and we might have to
employ other strategies that focus on
glutamine as another nutrient that we
need to suppress in order to reduce cyst
growth over the long term. I will do
another recap episode to give you the
gist of everything. So, before we go
into too much detail on this, let's go
over to the man himself explaining all
these concepts and how they relate to
PKD. Professor Thomas Seaffruit.
Welcome, Professor Seafruit from Boston
College.
>> Cool. Thank you, Felix. Yes.
>> So, the people in the PKD field, they're
sort of familiar with ketogenic diets,
and you're basically the pioneer of
bringing this to the forefront of uh of
discussions, especially in the field of
cancer. And most people that are
watching this probably aren't super
familiar with um even mitochondria which
is uh your main focus. So could you
maybe give us a short overview of
mitochondria and why they are super
important for our cells?
>> Yes, they are the controllers of our
cell metabolism. They are the
controllers of the differentiated state,
the quiescent state. They are the
controllers of the cell cycle. So um the
field of biology has placed enormous
study of the nucleus, the biology of the
nucleus containing the DNA material
uh that uh everyone is excited about.
But it turns out in the long run it's
the mitochondria that control what the
nucleus does. It's just unbelievable. Um
you have to realize
um you can have a lot of damage to the
nucleus and the cell can still be there
and function to some uh extent. The
mitochondria has its own genome. Um it's
circular and it's multiple and there are
13 genes in the mitochondrial genome
that control the kingdom uh that control
the the life of the cell. anything would
happen to any one of those 13 genes, the
cell up and dies very quickly. So the
mitochondria control the life and death
of the cell um in all in all aspects.
And I have always viewed the nucleus as
a responder to mitochondrial uh
function. So uh mitochondria control the
uh epigenetics of the nucleus. So um
what goes on in the physiology of that
cell ultimately revolves around what the
mitochondria do. So and the mitochondria
allow the cell to respond in different
ways to changes in the environment. So
uh genes turn on and turn off largely in
response to uh something happening in
the physiology the physiological state
of the cell which is controlled by the
mitochondria. So this is the control
switch because the apotic signaling the
program cell death uh is controlled by
the mitochondria. So the life and death
of the cell is controlled by that
organel uh which which merged uh
billions of years ago uh to allow
metazzoans because let's be honest
before mitochondria which were a cyano
cyano kind of bacteria before
mitochondria merged with another cell
there was no metazone there was no
multisellular organisms so the reason
why you and I and others are here today.
All most living organisms is the result
of that fusion h uh process. Um that is
the origin of multisellular life
controlled by that by that organism
which has now taken residence in the
majority of cells. So, and it controls
um uh our our life, our extension, our
existence on the planet, how long we can
live is depending on is dependent on how
long we can keep mitochondria healthy
and functional. Because what happens is
that if you die of old age, you know,
you're alive like Queen Elizabeth, she
say she's shaking the hand of the the
new uh the new prime minister one day
with a big smile and two days later
she's dead.
So what happens is you get a systemic
shutdown of mitochondrial function and
you die. Um unless you have all these
diseases that would uh you know damage
mitochondria before uh before their
energy would run out and you die from
those things. But yeah, I look at the
mitochondria as as the the controller of
the kingdom of the cell and um you must
respect the organel and if it gets if it
gets corrupted in any way uh it can um
uh lead to all kinds of of you know
pathological conditions. So uh yes so
this organel is very important and we
have not yet found any tumor cell
anywhere that has a normal number
structure and function of mitochondria.
Consequently, the cell is fermenting. Uh
all all cancer cells are fermenttors,
which means energy without oxygen
because the mitochondria lost control.
And then the cells fall back on these
ancient pathways uh metabolic pathways
before mitochondria fused before the
fusion hybridization happened. And we
had cells that had no mitochondria and
they were all dependent on fermentation
and they would have disregulated growth.
Regulation of growth only came after the
fusion of the cyanobacteria with the
other kind of cell uh and life complica
complex life began to develop at that
time. These are the laws of nature.
These are what leads to where we are
today in most uh life forms using uh
sunlight as energy which is just about
most things living on the planet today.
That's an interesting way to put it that
mitochondria. Would you say that they're
sort of the the brakes on the
uncontrolled growth?
>> Oh, absolutely. They they control the
cell cycle through the proton uh
gradient. Calcium signaling controls the
cyclones and the cyclones are the are
the proteins that allow the cell to go
through uh the cell cycle. So, uh that's
all regulated by the mitochondria. So if
the mitochondria lose their control the
cell falls back on a default state which
is proliferation uncontrolled and the
fuel to do that is fermentation. All one
the problem with medicine and people
today is they don't understand
evolutionary biology. Once you
understand evolutionary biology all this
stuff makes perfect sense. There should
be no controversy.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/keto
forc cancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rockermeer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement. Starting with the
general scientific concepts by Dr.
Thomas Cipherid, we will show you how to
start the ketogenic diet, including
which foods to choose and which to
avoid. Additionally, we prepared a list
of doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols. So, take a look around
at school.com/ keto for cancer.
>> You know, uh but you know, when you when
you when you don't understand
evolutionary biology and have no clue,
then everything seems to be so
mysterious and very complicated and
difficult to understand. I understand
all this stuff. I mean, it's because I
understand evolutionary biology and I
can make I can link the dots. You link
the dots understand the
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. The way the way I put it makes a
lot of sense. I think um
>> not really makes sense. It's supported
by scientific data.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And you're saying if the
mitochondria are sort of the
breakthration then um yeah that that
brings me to to the big parallel which
we want to draw today which is the one
between cancer and PKD which has been uh
drawn in in some other papers already
and I wanted to talk to you about this
specifically because um there are some
images of uh PKD mitochondria and if you
look at the electron microscope imagery
in the papers that have them and compare
them to to your papers and compare how
the mitochondria look. They're basically
indistinguishable. So, um do do you do
you think it's a possibility or do you
know if basically
all proliferative dis diseases including
PKD but also other proliferative
diseases could be um of this origin?
>> Well, disregulated prolifer that's what
cancer is. It's it's cell division out
of control disregulated cell growth.
But, you know, it's very interesting. We
draw comparisons as Warberg had done and
Dean Burke and myself to the liver liver
regeneration. They the uh liver
regenerating liver cells can grow uh
faster than any hepatoma, any liver
cancer. And they're regulated that they
they know exactly when to stop uh
because the m they're they're using
respiratory energy. They're not using
fermentation energy. So uh it's a very
interesting difference because here you
have cells that are growing very rapidly
under control of the mitochondria. Uh
but the hepatoma of the same cells is
cell division out of control because the
mitochondria and the hepatom is damaged
and and they're not they're damaged or I
should say inefficient in their ability
to produce energy through oxidative
phosphorilation and therefore those
cells are in their default state which
is proliferation. Whereas in the
regenerating liver, normal regenerating,
they're under the control of energy
metabolism from the mitochondria
controlling the cell cycle. How those
liver cells know when to stop uh is
quite intriguing and um uh-c but it is
obviously the mitochondria because when
it's damaged, the liver cells no longer
know when to stop.
>> Yeah.
>> So again, this these are very exciting
areas of research.
>> Yeah. It is super exciting and and it's
very exciting to to to the audience on
this podcast because we uh are afflicted
by this proliferation or uncontrolled
proliferation in polycystic kidney
disease and in our case uh and this is
also for the viewers the PKD1 and PKU 2
mutations they uh code for the
polycystin one and polycystin 2 proteins
which um are help in the regulation of
intracellular calcium which um is is
very tightly intertwined with with
oxygen metabolism, right? So,
>> um and you work a lot with or or you
talk about u the BA1 for example in
cancer
>> and uh I I was wondering if you could
sort of draw some parallels between
those two and and how um a genetic
mutation which doesn't in itself affect
the mitochondria can then over time lead
to mitochondrial dysfunction like this.
>> Yeah. Well, that's what we did. Now, I I
have to be honest with you. I haven't
done a deep dive on polycystic kidney
disease. Uh but from what you've already
said, it seems like there might be uh a
strong linkage with mitochondrial
dysfunction. Um but Branco one uh you
know leaf many which is a p-53 germline
mutation. Um none of these uh so-called
germline mutations are 100% penetrant.
uh meaning that there are people that
have the mutations that never develop
the the pathology of cancer um and and
so therefore we look at all the
mutations as secondary risk factors
rather than primary risk factor and I I
give the comparison what is a primary um
what is a what is a mutation that is
100% associated with pathology and I can
use the mutation Huntington's disease uh
which is a mutation in the protein
Huntington anyone that would inherit
that mutation 100% of the patients
develop the neurological disease.
Huntington's disease, Tay-Sax disease,
cystic fibrosis, these kinds of of of
mutations are the prime uh prime cause
of the pathology. But if the if the
mutation is not 100% penetrant like all
of the major cancer u known germline
mutations, then they cannot be
considered prime causes. they can be
considered secondary causes or risk
factors. And uh if the mutation does in
fact disrupt mitochondrial function,
there is a good probability that you
will see the pathology. If the mutation
does not disrupt mitochondrial function,
it is unlikely that you will see the
pathology. So the prime cause of cancer
is damage to oxidative phosphorilation,
whether done by an environmental insult
or a germline risk factor. Um, so you
put all that together. I don't know what
the penetrance is. I didn't look at
polycystic kidney disease. We'll have to
go back and uh check that out. And which
means that
>> does everyone who inherits the dominant
mut most dominant mutations are not 100%
penetrint uh in cancer, but like in
Huntington's disease, it can be. You can
have dominance that are 100% penetrant.
I'd have to go back and look and see
whether polycystic kidney disease
because that mutation that you just
mentioned is associated with
mitochondrial dysfunction. So that
phenotype is in some way related to when
I say mitochondrial dysfunction it's
usually an interruption of ability to
get energy through oxygen which is
oxidative phosphorilation. Uh I I have
to be cautious in what I say only
because I have not done as much work on
polycystic kidney disease.
>> Sure.
>> As I have done on many many other types
of cancers uh which I you know I put my
I'm I'm I'm more concerned right now
>> about managing the majority of major
cancers and polycystic kidney disease is
kind of like on the wings right now but
but it could be brought into the into
and managed just as effectively. But I
but I don't know.
>> Sure. Sure. Um so one thing that um
maybe arises from this is most people
that have the ADPKD mutation and from
the data that I've seen it's not
entirely clear if it's 100% penetrate or
not. But there are some um
populationwide genomic studies which
suggest that there's about twice as many
people with the mutation as would have
been assumed in the past when you uh
would just be looking at symptoms. So so
people who have done ultrasound or um
who have been diagnosed with with cyst.
So I suspect it might not be 100%
penetrant but um that in itself would
actually be a major discovery. So um
it's I don't think it's clear.
Yeah. No, and again I I don't want to
speak to that but I you'd have to have
you know people screened in the
population
>> like or for example polycystic kidney
disease runs in the family uh and if
it's a dominant then you have 50% of the
offspring would would be expected to
have that.
>> Yes. And then you would say if it skips
a generation and uh you find that this
person was a carrier, they never
experience, they never manifested the
phenotype, but their offspring now does,
then that's not 100 and that that's
clear evidence that it's not 100%
penetrant
>> really. Okay. So, so if people have the
ADPKD or any kind of mutation and is
hetererozygous, then um can you sort of
explain to us how that impacts the
expression of the affected protein? Like
do we still make 50% of the correct
version of the protein, 50% incorrect,
or how how is it managed and how does it
over the long term then maybe in the
case of of another mutation that you're
more familiar with um impact
mitochondrial metabolism?
>> Yeah. Well, I I I don't know. I, as I
said, I have to I'd have to look more at
it. But generally, what we find for
dominant mutations in in humans is that
um uh there's a suppressor gene of some
sort uh that prevents the the phenotype
from being seen. Uh that's why they call
skip generations. Like why what the hell
this person has the mutation uh uh but
they never expressed it. Why did that
person not express the phenotype? And
that's usually some more complicated
explanation. It could be environmental.
It could be another gene in the genome
which they call suppressor mutations
which prevent the expression of of a
protein or whatever. Uh there's there's
many different explanations uh for these
kinds of things. But the issue of course
that we're more concerned about today is
um if one does have the polycystic the
dominant form of polycystic kidney
disease uh uh they will have phenotypes.
uh what is the probability of that
phenotype morphing into some form of of
cancer and um I think that should be the
more uh acute question and also uh what
can you do to prot potentially reduce
the probability of you getting uh a
malignancy uh based on on expressing the
the gene. Is there a way you can is
there a way you can use diet or exercise
or something like this to reduce the
probability of that gene causing
disregulated cell growth? I mean I think
in other words is is there anything we
as a as a a person could do uh to uh uh
help help them reduce risk and and we'd
have to look more into that like you
said these diet therapies um they may be
effective in reducing risk or you know m
or preventing uh tumors from other
organs uh as a consequence of having
that of that dominant mutation. So um
again uh I think that's the key that
you'd like to you'd like to look at.
>> Yeah. Yes. So, so just really short um
mechanistically speaking if there is
something that people can do maybe in in
your in your case in leaf ramani um that
if it's a hetererozygous mutation can
people sort of influence the body to
make more of the correct copy of this uh
of from the gene or is it not possible
and is it always 50/50 the expression?
Um, no, no. I mean, I think you have to
look at each, as I said, I I I haven't
studied polycystic kidney disease like
we used to study Huntington's disease
and and some of the other dominant like
muscle muscular Duchaine's
musculardrophe and things like this. Um,
so I would have to go back and look at
that. Okay. uh when I used to teach
neurogenetics
uh I would talk about these various
conditions but I I don't remember doing
a lot of work on on polycystic kidney
disease.
>> Yeah.
>> Um so so you know I'd have to go back
and refresh my my my my studies on this
and look into it. But you know the issue
here we're we're concerned and I think
people people should who have that
mutation in their genome they're they're
they're the issue that they should be
most concerned about is whether they're
just going to have uh kidney cysts or
whether they're going to have a
malignancy in some other organ besides
the kidney.
>> Yeah. and and I think um they would like
to know uh can can they maintain control
uh over the situation uh and thereby
reduce their uh risk of getting liver or
uh a liver cancer or some a cancer in
some other organ.
>> Yeah.
>> And I I think that might be the best
thing because if you inherit something
there's not anything we can do about you
getting or not getting the mutation. If
you have the mutation, is there anything
you can do to reduce the probability
that mutation may uh the symptoms of the
mutation could be in some way reduced?
And I think yeah,
>> we would like to know whether that's
possible or not.
>> Yeah. So so so a main um model that
people uh use in PKD is the is the
second hit hypothesis and I think it's
also um in cancer in in some models,
right? Well, you know, the second hit
hypothesis is usually involves the
destruction or interference with
mitochondria. You you you have to uh I
mean that that goes back uh what's his
name? Gez, I when you get old, you can't
remember anybody's name. No.
>> Um it it'll come to me. Uh the two hit
hypothesis that that's based on the
sematic mutation theory of cancer.
There's retinol blasto. think there's
some other mutations that that do this,
but all I know is you can't get cancer
without with when you have your
mitochondria healthy.
>> Yeah,
>> that's a fact. You want to know every
every tumor that we've seen has a mito
so the second hit must involve um uh
mitochondrial dysfunction in one form or
another. You know, it's a chicken or egg
question, isn't it? So, uh when I
>> No, it's not is it not?
>> No, chicken. We rule that out. uh with
the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments. It's clearly mitochondria.
It's not chicken or
>> Oh, that's not that's not what what I
meant. Um so, so the way I think about
it, and correct me if this is totally uh
not correct. The way I think about it is
if I have one healthy copy of the PKD
genes like the PC1, PC2, and I have one
mutated copy,
>> then for a certain amount of time, the
kidney might just work sort of okay with
uh those those versions and then injury
happens. this so-called second hit
>> and then one cell just by chance doesn't
have the second copy of the of the gene.
So now both are mutated in some way and
now this cell is is really really
damaged and this one starts
proliferating and then taking up space.
Is that a possibility?
>> Well, I I think the second hit uh you
have a predisposition and then as you
said then you all of a sudden now uh
have the full manifestation of the
problem. where where what was the second
hit? What what was this? Um you know,
you you you you uh it's hard to know
because
>> yeah,
>> the the it's hard to know because when
you have the disregulated cell growth in
in cancer, you produce and this is what
I I I think was the second hit was an
was an environmental uh problem. Yes.
>> Um where the second alil was supposedly
damaged, but what's damaging? What's the
origin of the damage? You know what the
origin of the dam is reactive oxygen
species
>> that are produced from the dysfunctional
mitochondria question that I had.
>> Yeah. Yeah. They're Ross are reactive
oxygen. They're carcinogenic and
mutagenic. So the second hit may have
come from the uh uh mutagenic effects of
Ross RO coming from dysfunctional
mitochondria.
>> So so um you know we can people can go
and they can spend you know the next
hundred years investigating this stuff.
the the the the you know, I'm at an age
where uh where we want to make we want
to resolve the problem.
>> Yeah. Um as fast as we can to give
people an opportunity to live longer
with a higher quality of life.
>> Yeah.
>> And um we pretty much know how to do
that if if we can if we can uh put the
different pieces of the puzzle together
and we can never be 100% sure that we
canbody. I always say that if you can
stay alive with a higher quality of
life, you're a young guy, right? Okay.
God forbid you get cancer. you do
metabolic therapy and and and you die at
98 years old without ever the cancer
ever recurring. Okay. Then you
>> how do we know? Uh we won't know that
until the until the final bell is rung,
>> right?
>> Yeah. And I want to get into that. I
want to get into that. I don't want to
get bogged down in genetics. Um I just
wanted to sort of set the stage so that
um because I think it's super relevant
to do the metabolic therapy and people
in the PK world are already doing it.
It's also it's also super relevant to
speak about the genetics and I think I
think the questions you uh presented are
extremely important and they need to be
evaluated in light of we need to we need
to evaluate the light of the genetics in
light of the environmental and metabolic
aspects. So this is why uh those
questions that you've asked are
extremely important for those
individuals that might be very
interested in this opening up a new
vista for them to start to think more
about second hits and what be could be
responsible and how the primary mutation
uh might in fact uh e either be
suppressed or enhanced depending on the
situation. So, I think it's a very I
think these are extremely important
questions. Uh, and I don't want to it's
just for me in my state right now. I
wish I I wish I had another 50 years to
live and maybe I would go after those
things. Yeah.
>> But you're not going to live forever, so
you might as well do what you can with
the time you have left.
>> Not that I'm going to be dead tomorrow.
But but the thing of it is those kinds
of experiments would be several PhD
students working on the problem
>> uh for quite a while. But but
nevertheless, they are very important
questions and I'm very happy that you
asked me those because I'm going to have
to start going back and look at it more
myself.
>> Yeah, we we'll mark it as unknown for
now.
>> Yeah.
>> So, at least we know that in PKD most of
the nephrons are actually like at least
for most of life are actually still
functioning and they're not
proliferating. But we have those few
that are proliferating and they're
making the cysts and they take up room
and that is sort of the the main issue
and I think that um the so we are seeing
some shrink some some shrinkage with
metabolic therapies and with the
ketogenic diet and I think it's it's
worthwhile to start um something similar
to your press pulse protocol which we
shouldn't should go into next um to
ultimately if if we really find a
protocol that that works perfectly
maybe get rid of most of the
proliferating cells and then end up with
a much smaller kidney that is much more
efficient and um yeah uh doesn't doesn't
do this this uncontrolled proliferation
anymore. So the I don't want to bury the
lead here. Um the super important
discovery that you made and that you
built upon the Warberg effect I think
you do you still call it the the Warberg
Q effect?
>> Yeah. Um well, you know, we're still in
the um wishy-washy state here. Uh I have
some uh very excellent uh colleagues,
posttos and students, and we're in the
process of re-evaluating the names uh
the terminologies uh that we use. Um you
know, um Warberg never mentioned that
this is my effect. He he he uh said it
was aerobic fermentation basically,
which people recognize as what they we
now call uh the war the Warberg effect.
Um B E from Racker from Cornell
University uh labeled that the Warberg
effect and everybody just jumps on it
and calls it a Warberg effect. And the
it's what it is is aerobic fermentation.
And what does that mean? That means
you're fermenting in the presence of
oxygen. That's what why are you why is
the cell fermenting in the presence of
oxygen? Because the oxidative
phosphorilation system is ineffic
inefficient. This is not a mystery. I
mean we went through all the major
cancers and showed that every one of
them have some defect in the number
structure and function of the
mitochondria which obviously require a
compensatory fermentation. I mean the
fact that there's so many folks out
there that can't understand that or
blaming genes um on this is just is just
nuts. I again you you have to wonder how
member the brains of members of our
species actually uh work. Um it's just
unbelievable ideological
dogma.
>> I mean it's just incredible. But you
know you have to wade through all this
>> and you hope that um you know half the
people say oh you know Warberg was
completely wrong. Tumor cells consume
oxygen at the same rate as normal cells.
Therefore uh they're not fermenting. And
we and others have clearly shown that
the oxygen consumption in tumor cells is
not linked completely to ATP synthesis
through oxidative phosphorilation. And
this is it's like they're uncoupled. And
for whatever reason, people can't
understand it because you know what the
problem is is so many people working in
the cancer field are molecular
biologists.
>> They're not they're geneticists,
molecular biologists. They're not
biochemists.
>> They don't know physiology. They don't
know biochemistry. They just look at
gene expression profiles hoping to get
some insight into what's going on. Never
actually asking can my cells grow in the
absence of fermentation fuels.
>> And the answer is we can't find any. And
we have been searching for for any
cancer cell that can survive in culture
in the absence of fermentable fuels. So
all cancers as far as we're concerned
are driven by the sugar glucose and the
amino acid glutamine. Our major
contribution which still is not
understood or accepted or even known
about is that the tumor cells are
fermenting glutamine. They're not
respiring glutamine. This is an
incredibly important point that people
for whatever reason can't wrap their
heads around. They're I'm working with
Christo Shinopoulos out of Budapest at
semis university the world leader on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. have to realize that
the mitochondria not only can produce
energy through oxos but when oxos is
inefficient they can produce energy
through substrate level phosphorilation
which is a non oxidative form of of
energy production and can happen in the
absence of oxygen. So the same organel
that's uh producing majority of energy
can also produce energy with a non
oxidative source and that's called
fermentation. And what is the fuel for
mitochondrial substrate level
fermentation? And it's glutamine. So
most I would say 90% of the people in
the metabolic cancer metabolism field
think that glutamine is respired. It's
an anoplurotic uh fuel for the TCA
cycle. Well, we showed no no no. It's
not that. You're dumping out suinic acid
out of the TCA cycle. You should never
dump suinic acid out of a TCA cycle if
you're respiring. You're fermenting.
Listen, listen. Let me tell you
something.
>> When people have heart attacks, okay?
You're you stop breathing because your
your heart's no longer pumping blood
through your right. The first thing you
see within a couple of minutes a massive
amount of lactic acid and suinic acid in
the bloodstream.
>> Where the hell is all that? That's the
those are the waste products of a
fermentation metabolism attempting to
keep cells alive in the absence of
oxygen which they can do up until five
or six minutes when the brain dies. All
right? Right.
>> But you see a huge amount of suinic acid
and lactic acid. Now as soon as you
start breathing your hearts come back
and you start breathing again. Lactic
acid and suxinic acid disappear from the
bloodstream because we're now respiring
again. The difference between that
scenario and cancer is the cancer cells
are continuing to produce lactic acid
and suinic acid even in the presence of
oxygen. Why are they doing that? Because
the oxidative phosphorilation system is
in in is insufficient.
>> Why is this so complicated for anybody
to understand? Why do why do the
majority of people forget about the
genetics guys, the molecular biology
guys, but what about the guys working on
cancer metabolism? Why is it that they
don't understand that?
>> Yeah.
>> And when you do the I mean it's just
unbelievable. So for me and I I say well
you know you get frustrated by another
member of your species not being able to
comprehend clear information. Um they I
you know we have to appreciate how the
other brains of others work. But you
know the bottom the bottom line is if
you understand what I'm saying it offers
a framework and pathway forward to start
managing cancer effectively. And for
whatever reason uh this is resisted by
or and and they they never seem to
attack the science. They they always
attack something peripheral to the
science.
>> Yes. Yes. And uh I think we can all
speculate as to the the reasons for
that. Um we've we've been around the
block for block for some time. Um so for
for uh PK uh patients who are listening
to this that are aware of the fact that
even PK cells use glucose to ferment um
we we really need to hammer this point
home that um from today we know that
it's not just glucose that these cells
can ferment but it's also the glutamine.
Um maybe you can tell us a little more
about um how you came upon this
discovery in cancer and how you are how
you've changed your recommendations for
cancer patients since then.
>> Yeah. Well, I I knew um in my book I
speculated first uh I was the first one
to speculate uh on this process. In
chapter eight of my book, uh we have
some interesting things because um
>> uh Hokka,
a gentleman who who knew a lot about
human physiology, he did some kinds of
experiments years ago, published them in
where he took animals that could swim
underwater like seals and walruses and
certain other kinds of things. I
dolphins and stuff, strap them to a
board. You can't you can't do this
today. Uh people get all bent out of
bent out of shape.
>> Yeah. Cruel. Cruel. But he but but what
he did was find some incredible
information. And that was that suinic
acid and lactic acid accumulated in the
bloodstream of these animals. Now these
were animals that could actually hold
their breath. Sign it wasn't taking a
dog or a cat and doing this. It was
doing with animals that of course
they're all freaked out everything. I
mean you can read the actual research.
But um and then when the animals started
brought them up they breathe again.
suxinic acid and lactic acid
disappeared. We have known in cancer for
a long time that cancer cells are
dumping out lactic acid and suxinic
acid. So I I said where's that suinic
and hokka said it was due to amino acid
fermentation but hok hokka never said
what the what the amino acid was that
was being fermented. So I just assumed
because they everybody in cancer field
knows that cancer cells suck down a lot
of glutamine and they were all con they
were all convinced that it was respired.
So um uh when we when we looked at all
the evidence from hokka and these others
I speculated that this uh glutamine is
being fermented. It's not being uh
respired and the end product would be
suinic acid dumped out rather than
staying in the DCA cycle. This is like
going back again. So so I contacted uh
uh Shinopoulos Christos because he's the
world expert. He published all these
papers with with himself and Dr. Treader
at at Budapest and I said to him, I have
this idea that I think uh and po and and
Christos was working purely in
biochemistry. He didn't get into the
cancer field and then I brought this to
his attention and now he's in the can. I
said, you know, the you're purely you're
pure biochemistry colleagues and this is
an academic
um exercise. There's no hard feelings.
There's no animosity. There's no anger.
>> Now that he jumps into the cancer field,
it's hostile. the cancer field is a very
hostile field. But he he told me he
said, "You're absolutely correct at what
you're saying. The problem is you didn't
have all the pathways aligned in the
correct way." So his input into this
allowed us now to align the correct
pathways to explain how a glutamine is
being fermented and the mechanism of
what's going on in this process. And we
have now in my I science paper done with
Christos and we're working together on
several of he's publishing papers out of
his institution. We're co-authors on a
number of these processes. We're better
defining how cancer cells are able to
produce energy through fermentation
mechanisms. And even when you think
about uh because don't forget without
energy no cell can survive. And this is
what Warberg was saying. He says forget
about every forget about everything
else. It's all about energy because once
you once you know how the cell is
getting energy you can then begin to
think about how to stop it. All the
other things gene expression profiles
this and that all secondary effects to
energy because once the energy goes
doesn't make any difference what
mutations they have don't make any
difference what they're doing.
>> So we said if cancer cells are ferment
are are can't generate enough energy
through oxos where are they getting
their energy from? Now Warberg said it
was all coming from glycolysis using
glucose. However, new studies say that a
lot of cancer cells and I don't know
about polycystic kidney, the py pyuvate
kynise PKM2
is a pyuvate kinase that produces lactic
acid but not compensatory for uh ATP. So
you got to know about that. Cancer cells
will use glucose for um metabolite
synthesis for growth factor for for the
metabolites to synthesize lipids,
proteins and nucleic acids through the
pentos pathways. lot of things but they
may not be producing that much energy
which people now got to realize. Whoa.
So you have a ratio of PKM to M1 and
which can produce energy through uh
through substrate level phosphorilation
which is what how you get substrate as
opposed to oxidative phosphorilation but
we don't know the exact amount of ATP
because there could be a ratio of PKM1
to PKM2. So Warberg's calculations and
others calculations are uh questioned uh
because we really don't know depending
on the ratio of these peak pyuvate
kinase isoforms really how much ATP is
going to be coming through the cytoplasm
and what we call substrate level
phosphorilation aerobic fermentation and
then you have a little bit of oxidative
phosphorilation insufficient to drive
the disregulated growth but there's some
from there and then you have the
glutamine uh coming from a fermentation
mechanism. So, so you have all these
bits and pieces of energy coming from
different parts of the cell depending
upon how damaged or how uh uh how this
how the overall global energy situation
happens to be.
>> But what we have found unambiguously is
that no tumor cell can grow without the
contribution of fermentable fuels which
is glucose and glutamine. And how much
that is depends upon how abil what the
ability of the oxfos system is. If the
ox system has a little bit then you
don't or or or a little bit more you
don't need as much fermentation but if
it has lower you need fermentation.
>> So there's even grades like uh the
content absolutely can be like partially
damaged some are damaged some are not.
So the cell in that case would the cell
be proliferating uh at half the speed
for example if just 50% mitochondria are
are damaged. Yeah. Well, that's what we
think and it's not just 50% of
mitochondria. It's like each cell in in
the disregulated growth may have a
different slightly different type. And
then the of course the other as aspect
is what is this the biology of the cell
that's uh involved in this and
metastatic cancers uh arise from our
immune cells uh macrofagages and some
luccoytes lymphocytes fusing with uh
stem cancer stem cells and you have this
hybrid kind of a cell
>> uh which which possesses macrofage car.
Why is that important? Because
macrofages can spread around the body.
stem cells can't. Stem cells can grow
like crazy, but but they can't spread.
They're not equipped genetically to
spread. The macroofage is equipped
genetically to spread. So when you have
a fusion hybridization between a cancer
stem cell rapidly growing and a an an
immune cell uh and the and the cytoplasm
now becomes corrupted and the
mitochondria become corrupted, you have
a cell that's now uh going into its
default state but can spread around your
body. So um so you have to realize that
and those cells are powerfully glutamine
driven. So we knew right away how to
manage metastatic cancer uh by targeting
the glutamine because most metastatic
cancers are strongly derived from our
immune system cells which are more
glutamine dependent than some other
cells.
>> So again you have to know the cell
biology uh of what's going on with all
this. And today
>> we have uh clinical trials uh that are
targeting glutamine and some of these
trials are are doing okay but they never
target the glucose at the same time. So
you never get optimal uh outcome if
you're leaving the the back door opening
cells to get some energy through the
cytoplasm.
>> And that is exactly where we are in PKD
right now because uh the ketogenic diet
has taken up some steam in the community
which is great and we are seeing uh some
people that are able to reverse and
shrink their kidney volume. uh it might
it might even be everybody but of course
it's not
>> it's not a huge kind of thing that you
would see in a tumor remission like it's
uh maybe it's a 10% reduction maybe it's
a 5% reduction
>> and that's what we see that's what we
see a lot with regular cancers as well
>> right
>> um we don't get complete resolution uh
and in in some cases we do but many
cases we don't and that's because we're
never targeting the two fuels together
>> and you transition the the body over to
nutritional ketosis the p purpose of
nutritional ketosis is to keep all of
the cells in your body that have normal
oxidative phosphorilation healthy and
even more healthy. And it also uh
deprivives the tumor cell of the fuel
glucose. The tumor cells can't burn
ketones unless they have a good
mitochondria. Most of them don't. So
they can't burn fatty acids or ketone
bodies. So the role of ketogenic diets
is basically to elevate ketones for the
health and vitality of your normal
kidney cells and cells in and other
organs uh while allowing the body to uh
lower glucose and transitioning away
from glucose. Now and I developed uh
here we developed a glucose ketone index
calculator which allows the patients to
know
>> people use this community.
>> Yeah. Oh yeah absolutely. If you can get
to 2.0 zero or below, you are now primed
for glutamine targeting. And now you can
you can take glutamine targeting and and
reduce any any adverse toxicity from
from the glutamine targeting
>> and glutamine targeting to explain to
the people who have never heard of this,
right? So they are on a therapeutic
ketogenic diet. They have a very low
glucose. They have high ketones. They're
doing everything right. And now we're
taking another fuel of these cells,
cancer cells or even PKD cells away with
which interventions?
>> Yeah. So you would use glutamine
targeting. Now one of the ways we have
some a paper that we've just come out
with high-grade gloma for children. God
our our therapy would save so many kids.
The problem is they're not doing it.
It's just so such a tragedy when you see
all these poor little kids dying from
high-grade glomomas. Um, but we found
embendazol, the parasite medication, has
some minor minor effect on on on
reducing glutamine uh metabolism as well
as glucose metabolism. Um, it works
better when you're in a ketogenic state.
So, um, we're working on that. But the
the most powerful drug we've seen so far
is is six deoxy oxonorucine
don uh d o n is an acronym. uh which is
really the as far as we're concerned we
haven't seen anything more powerful than
this um and and and uh we can use it
with ketogenic and we've published
papers on on showing how Don works with
the ketogenic diet in pre-clinical
systems um but none of it's it's
nobody's doing it um none of the big
hospitals are doing this uh because Don
you can't make money on it's off patent
it's a non it's a it's a they say oh
it's too toxic well if you figure a way
to take a tremendously powerful drug and
and figure out how to remove or reduce
its toxicity. It's like having a new
drug,
>> but but they still don't want to use it.
Now, you ought to ask why that why do
they not want to use a drug
>> that could be really powerful and help
so many people uh whether it's in
Germany, the United States, England,
Japan, they don't use the damn drug and
it's the drug is so powerful and if you
use it according to press pulse
concepts, you'll get really good results
for the majority of people. Our
prediction is this. Um, but nobody's
doing this anywhere. Nobody is targeting
glucose and glutamine simultaneously
while placing the patient in nutritional
ketosis.
>> Maybe PKD is even a field that is less
fought over. And maybe it's a maybe it
could even in the future be a an
interesting candidate to maybe get more
people sort of uh doing the proof of
concept because right now even the the
clinical trials for the ketogenic diet
seem to be underway in a pretty good uh
stage and the first one with 3 months
runtime has already been concluded. Um,
so I think we now have close to maybe a
thousand people online that are actively
doing the ketogenic diet for PKD and
they have never heard of glutamine
inhibition. So if we maybe could give
them sort of an overview of what they
can do on their own and what they can do
with a doctor. Yeah. Well, I think you
know as we said with glutamine
targeting, you really you really have to
be very very careful um because
glutamine is necessary for our gut.
Glutamine is necessary for the function
of our immune cells.
>> Uh glutamine is necessary for the ura
cycle. Um if you do not know how to use
this tool, it you can harm patients. So
you have to have a knowledgeable person
knowing that's why we developed the
pulsing of glutamine rather than
pressing. You can press glucose down
because it's not essential because gl
ketones can replace glucose but you need
the glutamine. So if you're too
aggressive in doing this, you could
actually damage the immune or your gut
or make or make a a a situation not as
good as it could be. So um again, and
this is where we are now today as you
and I are speaking. We're at the
position of of dosage, timing, and
scheduling. This is the cutting edge of
where we are right now. What is the
doses, timing, and scheduling of the
glutamine targeting to go along with the
nutritional ketosis? So, and we're
trying to figure out what drugs and what
combinations, timing, and dosage. And
and as as as uh people in the field, and
I've said it over again over and over
again in many of these podcasts, we
don't consider the field of academic
medicine does not consider this as sexy
science.
>> Yeah.
>> This is not the kind of really wow. you
know, we're trying to figure out the
best dosage timing and scheduling to uh
allow allow the person to live a higher
quality of life and a much longer
survival. All right? And well, this
doesn't seem like it's really uh but
I'll tell you when you don't have the
right dosage timing and scheduling,
you're not going to get the optimal
effect. And how do we do that? Well, we
have to do we have to work on
pre-clinical systems and we share that
with the oncology community with people
and then the people now are at least
aware and we have to monitor their
overall blood work and physiology as we
start to change dosage timing and
scheduling. Um and see how the patients
are responding. How do you feel today?
Uh let's look at your your growth. Let's
look at a lot of these parameters and
then what worked for this person may not
be optimal for another person. Yes.
>> So we have to use each person as their
own control because everybody is
different. They're different body
weight, different genders and all these
kinds of things. And we're dealing with
a physiological a dynamic physiological
system
>> that has to be worked on individually.
>> Now will there come some general time in
the future where we can make some
general uh assumptions on how people
will will respond? Maybe, maybe not. But
this is the cutting edge. what I just
said right now is the cutting edge and
it will become the future of managing
cancer everywhere on the planet once
people understand what's going on.
>> Yeah. So, so for people who are maybe at
a later stage in their disease and uh as
in cancer um don't have too much time to
to to to wait um what so there's two
different approaches right um you could
either sort of go it on your own you
could maybe do some hyperbaric o o o o o
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o oxygen
therapy to maybe increase your chances
of of of uh decreasing some of the cyst
growth and maybe you could combine it um
and maybe you can speak to this with uh
the other more natural supplements that
that you've mentioned like EGCG or even
with with prescription stuff like
chlorocquin or or meendazol and um
alternatively they could find a doctor
that would usually do this with cancer
patients and see if if they are willing
to also um take somebody on board with
PKD what do you think about these two uh
>> those are good good good points um you
know um chloricquin u why chloricquin is
important it might stop fagosy there's a
lot of things in it chloricquin just
neutralizes acidity in the loome um and
you know and bendol you know the
parasite medication fenendazol I I again
we we have to I I I have to pre I have
to test preclinally a lot of this stuff
>> um because you're you're have what we
call we have a lot of moving targets
here we have a lot of variables uh you
know which one is working best with
another we're always looking for synergy
uh we want synergy
We don't want antagonism. We don't want
to use something that antagonizes the
therapeutic bene benefit of something
else.
>> We want synergy. Okay? And those
experiments are laborious and
timeconuming. And uh when we run these
things here at Boston College, you know,
our vivarium, we we we have to do the
experiments with control groups. Uh and
then we have to repeat it. And after we
get the results, we have to repeat it
again. and and we need to repeat it and
repeat it and repeat it to be 100% sure
what the hell we got and we want to make
sure the facts and the outcomes are
reproducible. And then once we have that
then we can tweak this and that again on
the background of what we know. Now
people people should know that this is
not um it's costly to do these
experiments. It's time consuming to do
these experiments. Yeah. But when we get
the right time, when we get the right
information, then we can speak more uh
uh uh knowledgeable have more knowledge
about the supplements that should be
used when they should be used. Uh
otherwise, we're just throwing stuff at
the wall and hoping something sticks. Uh
we want we want to know which which uh
supplements are synergistic and why we
need to use them when we use them. Uh,
and without that information, we're
we're just, you know, we're just ex just
like um I don't know what do you want to
do? Hope for the best or you know, just
hope you hit the target by chance. You
know, it it's it's you got to have more
you got to have more knowledge about
what you're doing.
>> So, we know that simultaneous targeting
of glucose and glutamine while the body
is in nutritional ketosis is likely to
provide the the greatest level of of of
success right now. But as again uh what
those uh glutamine targeting drugs uh
how they work together uh and when we
should use them along with hyperbaric
oxygen uh again we always tell people if
you're going to do hyperbaric oxygen
make sure you have a low GKI when you go
into the chamber and that's also depend
on the day the the time of the day
because everybody's body is different.
So we're optimizing the variables um
that will eventually be brought into a
comprehensive uh treatment protocol and
as I said we've we've we've written a
very very comprehensive treatment
protocol for glyopblastoma brain tumor
which is now submitted for publication
uh which over we have over 40 m uh
physicians and scientists on this on
this article um which we brought we br
yeah yeah we brought in a lot of
discussion from a broad range of
physicians and we put a very
comprehensive treatment protocol
together and then that now allows
physicians in the clinics to say okay I
have a treat I have a plan here let's
follow the plan and as we begin to
implement the plan we'll get feedback
from those who are using the protocol
telling us how we can optimize the
different parts of this now this this
treatment is very strikingly different
from the way we're we're are developing
new drugs for cancer and these kinds of
things currently where we take a
singular drug and we have double blind
crossover. We cannot do we have to
metabolic therapy the whole system of of
clinical trial analysis has to be re
re-evaluated because metabolic therapy
cannot be forced into a a trial that's
been used for singular drugs. So because
we're using as you just said we're using
multiple drugs and we're using and we're
using diet and multiple drugs together
uh all all to improve the outcome of an
individual's uh on the on the planet.
So, we're not rounding up people and
throwing into these trials. And and you
have to know how to use the diet.
>> And the diet is not I hate to even use
the term diet.
>> We use we use these things to facilitate
the action of the drugs. Um you know
what's what what what diet may work for
this guy could be totally different than
the diet that works for the other guy.
So when you say we're doing trials on
ketogenic diets, uh we we look at each
individual. Are they are they
vegetarians? Are they pescatarians? What
the hell is that? Not everybody's the
same. So, we have to build metabolic
therapy around each individual's
physiology
>> so that they all can get into the GKI of
2.0 or below and they may one guy may
use a different totally different diet
than the other guy.
>> So, uh we don't want to throw all these
people because some people say I can't
do this. It's too and everybody
criticize, oh, it's too hard to do that.
You know, we do it with little kids all
the time with epilepsy. thousands and
thousands of little kids are on these
metabolic therapies and it's and the
parents adjust it to what the kid likes.
>> So, uh again, when I say when you're
saying, well, we're doing clinical
trials on polycystic kidney disease with
ketogenic diets, well, I hope the hell
you the guys doing those things know
what they're doing. Um because what
happens is you don't get the results.
>> I don't think they're doing GKI.
They they're doing uh blood ketones.
>> Jesus Christ. I mean, I I sit and listen
to these guys and I and they do this
stuff and they say, "Oh, it didn't work
as well as well." For Christ's sake, you
didn't have the right people doing the
damn thing.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, I did see that that they they
definitely did measure blood ketones and
they did have a uh they did have an
effect. So, it's not like it didn't
work. But maybe in PK it's easier to
because it's uh not not growing so fast.
>> Yeah. But the the effects could be
dramatically better if you know how to
do what you're doing and and and know
this. So, yeah. always gives us some
effect. No more studies are needed. You
know, we would we would work we would
work up each person as an individual.
Work them up as an individual and then
we would cate we would know what these
guys should have and how what their diet
what the drugs. So, uh and it might
differ from one person to the next.
>> So, is it realistic for somebody uh with
with PKD to to find a doctor or somebody
that that's working with your protocol
um that's usually doing it for cancer?
>> Yeah, good luck with that.
you're not going to get any money. You
go and ask these guys
>> because they're overrun with with cancer
patients.
>> No, they're not overrun. They just
That's part of it for sure. But the
other thing is they have no clue. They
have no knowledge about what I just
said. They they have no clue about the
biology of the disorder they're working.
>> No, but even the few that are doing it
your way. That That's what I'm saying.
>> Oh, nobody's doing it. Most if if we're
doing some some of these kinds of
things, we're in experimental stages. I
mean, we have certain clinics in the
country, but again, they throw
supplements at the problem, and I said,
"What does this supplement do?" We're
still not there yet. Uh, we have the
framework. We have the knowledge, but we
the practical application is where we
are. And and and we need to get now.
Yes, there are some folks that do so
unbelievably well. And then there are
those who don't.
>> Um, why are the guys why this guy did so
well and the other guy didn't? And then
you find out there are tremendous
differences in the physiology of that
guy versus the other guy. Yeah.
>> So we need to work out a lot of the the
the the nuances of of this thing. And
because everybody I can tell you one
thing, Felix, everybody wants this.
>> They want this more than anything that
they're that the system offers. But the
the application has not yet been
perfected where we can bring in some guy
and look at him and within three hours
tell him exactly what path he should be
taking.
>> Yeah. uh we need we're in the
experimental uh thing and you'd be
surprised how many people would like to
jump into this uh and use themselves as
kind of guinea pigs uh to uh to
determine their outcome and those guys
that do really really well start telling
everybody else how well they're doing.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Ciphford on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rocker, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
Dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paperbook via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereaded's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker has already made at
www ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just investing in your own
knowledge, you're also contributing to
the future of cancer research. Help us
make a difference. Together, we can
drive change and save lives.
>> But not everybody does that. And I have
to be honest with you, you know, some of
our people that I know that I'm working
with, like Pablo Kelly with the brain
cancer. I mean, he's not cured, but he's
alive 10 years. He would have been dead
like in 15 months, but he's not cured.
The damn tumor is still growing. And
with your polycystic population, you
might find these people are just just
living with it. It's it's not getting
worse. It's not,
>> you know, and they're living far longer
and they're not as debilitated
by the the symptoms.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And even now we're we're
seeing a lot of people who who are
actually re reversing and um that that's
even what the podcast is called, right?
Reversing PKD. I'm I'm one of them. But
um of course it would be super
interesting to even try like some very
low uh low efficiency but highly
available glutamine inhibition things
like HBO, EGCG, stuff like that.
>> Well, I I don't think they're going to
hurt. Um yeah, I they could have some
minor effect. I would say MBZ might be
more powerful and benzol. Yeah. And
bendazol.
>> Yeah.
>> And fen maybe fen bendazol. These are
dewormers. Um
>> and you would pulse them like in the
hbot if you were doing
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. And people always say,
you know, why why are you using this
parasite medication? Well, what the
hell, man? Uh the parasites and the
cancer cells use metabolic substrate
level phosphorilation to get energy.
>> They ferment.
>> They ferment,
>> right? You know, you know, and people I
didn't know that. Well, because you
don't spend as much time doing this
as I do for Christ sake.
>> Yes,
>> that's I live and die this stuff. I'm on
this stuff constantly. And after a
while, you say to yourself, how you
people don't know that? I didn't know. I
never read the article. I Oh, geez.
Well, you got to read the articles and
you got to say, why do these parasite
medications work so well against cancer?
Because the tumor and the and the
parasite are using mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation to get
energy. Yeah.
>> So the so so the embendazol works
against the glucose fermentation but
also against the glutamine fermentation.
Is it
>> Yes. But it's not the big it's not a big
hammer. It's like a it's like a small
hammer.
>> A couple percent like 10% or what is it?
>> Yeah. Yeah. And but it you know synergy
it happens like if you do the bendazol
by itself you might get a little effect.
You do the keto by itself you get a
little. You put the two together and you
get a synergistic effect.
>> Yeah. And now we're learning that there
may be other other really good drugs
that have been, you know, dumped dumped
out because they didn't work. But we're
finding we're taking those out of the
pales and putting them back into this
nutritional paradigm and they seem to
whoa they take on a new power of their
own.
>> So uh this is
>> uh well we got Dimeistat. This is a a
very interesting drug. Um you we you can
see it in the paper that we published in
bioarchchives. Dimeistat was for kidney
um p pancreatic cancer. It's also
blocking a pathway in the substrate
level phosphorilation but it didn't
work. Uh so here's the situation. Uh it
was used in humans with kidney can
pancreatic cancer and it was too toxic.
So the the results were not were not
good and uh but it we looked at it and
we said you know this could be good. So
then we gave it to the mice with uh
brain cancer uh just by itself with the
chow. No, did didn't work at all. Um
just like we found in the human. So the
mouse and the human when you're using
the drug by itself didn't work. But then
when we put it together with the
ketogenic diet, man, alive.
>> Damn thing worked so much better. And
and I don't know if the I don't know if
the drug company making Deimistat knows
this or could care about it, but we l we
looked at it. We said, "Holy crap." So,
this one's actually approved because Don
isn't right. Can doctors get it?
>> Uh, no. That's the problem. Uh, Don, why
that drug? That drug should be on
everybody. That should be
over-the-counter stuff, but it should be
I don't know. I don't want to say over
the counter. It should be prescribed by
somebody who knows how to use it
>> by Yeah.
your
>> Yes. A trained in and in in pulsing Don
and knowing when the patient is in a
certain state that the doctor would
order that. but he's also depending on
us to give him the information to know
what to do.
>> So, um, and Don is real powerful. Um,
uh, and when you use it with MBZ and
Don, I mean, you get really good
results. And I think Deimeistat could be
brought into this. And I think there's
going to be a whole bunch of these
drugs, uh, that will take on new life of
their own uh, once they once they're put
into the metabolic therapy. And with the
correct dosage and timing, we may be
able to achieve tremendous success not
only on cancer patients, but polycystic
kidney disease patients as well. It's
just that no one else is doing this.
>> We're the only guys on the planet that
are doing this stuff.
>> Yeah, I know. I know. That's why I
wanted to talk to you. I mean, uh the
glutamine, nobody knows this. And uh
you're you're spreading the word.
>> Well, if you No, if you go to any
oncology uh center and you say cancer
needs glue. Oh, of course cancer needs
glue. Everybody knows cancer.
>> Oh, yeah. I'm saying in PKD, but yeah,
of course. Uh I always bring the two
together because that's so simple.
>> But they but but they're going to say,
"Did you know glutamine is fermented?"
Aha. No, I didn't know that. Okay, now
you should know that.
>> Okay, so that's the big thing.
>> And uh yeah, so I you know, I do all
these things and people are always
asking me all these questions and what
should I do and what, you know, uh and
uh the field is just lost. It's just
stumbling around. Uh still locked into
this whole genetic thing. cancer is a
genetic disease and and doing all this
crazy stuff to harming people. Um, and
it it should stop. These guys got to
know what's going on.
>> And eventually once they start learning,
they're all going to say, "Oh yeah, this
really works good." You know, and I'm
saying, "Well, yeah."
>> They're going to say, "It was obvious
all the time.
>> It was obvious.
>> It was obvious. So, how come nobody's
doing it?"
>> Yeah, exactly. That's what they're going
to say.
Right.
>> Yeah.
>> Amazing.
>> No, your systems are locked into a rigid
rigidity. And I can say that in Germany
as well, man. Those guys are locked in.
But so are the British and so are the
Americans. I mean, there's almost zero
flexibility. The French, you know,
they're all the same. They're locked in.
The system has got them locked in and
there's no flexibility allowed.
>> You must do it this way and no other
way.
But for the but for the people doing the
the trials on ketogenic diet for PKD,
you would probably suggest to them to to
add a glutamine inhibition strategy to
it.
>> Well, I would say I would say do that
only after you get yourself into a low
GKI 2.0 below. Don't do it before that
>> and do it with any diet that you can do
whether it's water only fasting,
carnivore diet, vegan, I don't care. you
get yourself into a low GKI and then you
can entertain the possibility of using
glutamine targeting drugs and uh right
now you mentioned a couple chloricquin
and EG EGCG it's a you know it's just so
weak um compared to these other yeah
it's you should see how power compared
to Don it's not even I mean it's you I
mean you want drugs that are really
going to work but you want to use them
you don't need much that's the other
thing when you when you know what to do
the amount of drug glutamine targeting
drug you need is so much less. So the
toxicity issue becomes almost a
non-issue.
>> Yeah. Was it like a couple hundred
milligrams or
>> Yeah, maybe even less. Uh but once
you're in ketosis, man, these drugs take
on uh they're so much more powerful and
so much less toxic. I mean I mean
>> can you believe it? So um yeah. So yeah,
you you know your your group polycystic
kidney disease uh could be a group uh to
test all this in a real effective way
and because you're going to see outcomes
that are pretty obvious pretty quick.
>> And um and if that's the case, you know,
you guys might be the spearhead that
that shifts the whole cancer field over
to the right the way they should be.
>> Who knows? It's it's definitely not as
fought over.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Right. So, uh, you have a
good possibility and again, I I wish you
the best in in in doing this, um, at
least putting the knowledge out and
seeing what happens. And maybe you guys
will will come up with the, uh, the best
dosage, timing, and scheduling of this
whole thing. Who knows?
>> Who knows? Yeah, we'll we'll certainly
uh keep on investigating it and I'll
definitely try some of the lower uh
easier to get stuff on on myself uh
whenever I reach the the certain uh
threshold of two or below,
>> which is not as easy. I'm uh trying out
these continuous ketone monitors and
glucose monitors right now, and it's not
that easy to get to a GKI that low.
Well, listen, you have to appreciate the
fact that our Paleolithic ancestors that
existed on the uh on the planet far
longer than our Neolithic period from
10,000 years ago, we were we were a a
species for several hundred thousand
years. And all of us were in ketosis at
that time because there weren't any
highly processed carbohydrate foods
anywhere to be found. So, um uh we were
always we were designed as a species to
be in nutritional ketosis. We are an
incredible species that can live without
food for long periods of time and remain
active. And the other thing that can
lower glutamine is act is exercise.
>> So uh we know that for a fact
>> because it drives it into the muscle.
>> Yeah. Uh Cahill George Cahill down here
has passed away. Head of the Joslyn
Diabetes Center published a nice paper
several years ago. Oh, probably 30 or 40
years ago showing that exercise could
lower systemic glutamine. So, if you can
get into nutritional ketosis with a good
degree of exercise and even a very minor
glutamine targeting, you might be able
to do a really good job at restricting
glutamine that way. So, again, it's it's
moving a lot of a lot of exercise. Uh
whether you run or walk or lift weights
or do any combination of these,
bicycling, whatever. Yeah. Uh you're
going to have the opportunity to lower
uh glutamine levels and uh also you
become less hungry uh when you're doing
exercise. Uh it's interesting uh if
you're sitting in front of a computer
all day long and some guy's walking by
with a pizza, you know, all of a sudden
you feel like you want to eat some of
the pizza or a donut or pastry of some
some sort. But if you're out riding your
bike or running, you're your your hunger
doesn't doesn't come as much. You can go
fasting for you can fast for a lot a lot
longer when you have exercise. And this
all goes back to our Paleolithic
ancestry. Those guys were moving all the
time. They're going to starve to death
that they didn't. You know how hard it
is to track down and kill a a mammoth or
or deer? I mean, you have to spend a lot
of time stabbing this thing, chopping it
up. I mean, you're using a lot of uh a
lot of exercise doing this.
>> So, uh exercise carbohydrate
>> by definition.
>> Yeah.
you know, you got you gotta love the our
you know, I don't know if they had
polycystic kidney disease back then. Uh
but they were they had other health
issues that that they that we have that
they didn't have.
>> But um
>> we you know we just have to know where
we came from uh our our our evolution
and then try to bring it together today
in our new knowledge and technology. So
uh this is where we this is where we
stand
>> right. Amazing. Yeah. So, I hope that uh
the super news on the extra fermentation
metabolism with glutamine will make it
into the PKD field as you're sounding
the bell in the cancer field and now
we've bringing it over which is amazing.
So, thank you so much for that. One last
idea that I had was um maybe you want to
give us like a the 60-second version of
what causes cancer and how to cure it so
we can sort of make a short video on
that. Well, as I said, we know ex I know
exactly what causes cancer, but I don't
want to say what can cure it. All I can
say is how to manage it. And no, as I
said, uh whatever damages uh chronically
damaged damages oxidative
phosphorilation in a in a mitochondria
of a particular cell in a particular
organ can lead to uh uh disregulated
cell growth with compensatory
fermentation. Whether that's exposure to
radiation, whether it's due to obesity
which is now replacing smoking leading
to systemic inflammation, uh type 2
diabetes, hypertension, all these kinds
of things. Um you know you can have
virus infection, hepatitis, hepatitis
virus, papilloma viruses, all of these
things damage oxidative phosphorilation.
Uh you know germline like you mentioned
polycystic kidney disease uh as
secondary u uh risk factors for cancer.
I mean, aging, all of these things will
chronically damage mitochondrial
function potentially leading to
disregulated growth with this
compensatory fermentation. So, we pretty
much know now how you prevent cancer.
Well, if you keep your mitochondria
healthy, it's very, very, very hard to
get cancer. And that's why cancer was
almost unheard of in our paleolithic
ancestors or in the or members of our
species that live according to ancestral
ways. Cancer is extremely rare.
Extremely rare in chimpanzees. uh
they're living uh according to their
whether in the zoo or in the wild they
they rarely if ever found to have
cancer. So uh we are the ones our
species has deviated so remarkably from
how we evolved putting us at risk for
all of these things. So chronic damage
to oxidative phosphorilation is the
origin of cancer and um preventing that
would keep your mitochondria healthy. So
you it's hard to get cancer if your
mitochondria remain healthy. the
management of cancer. As I've already
said, you have to then target the
fermentable fuels and you try to do that
while while enhancing the health of the
rest of the body. You're going to need
the normal cells of the body to work
with any kind of drug or therapy to kill
off these tumor cells. We can't we can't
um work work successfully if we're
poisoning and irdiating and and and
mutilating people with the attempt to
help make them healthy. This is not
working.
um the promise of the genome that we
were supposed to use precision medicine
and all this kind of stuff because we
but the the the field of cancer put
billions and billions of dollars into
these targeted therapies,
imunotherapies, iminooncology based on
the wrong theory. Cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder, not a
genetic disorder. So if you're
constantly developing drugs based on an
incorrect theory, the outcome will never
be optimal for the majority of people
receiving those. So once the theory
changes, the ideology has to change.
this is a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder and once you know that then the
opportunities for prevention and
management become completely different
or very much different doesn't mean we
have to throw out all of the tools that
we've developed for cancer in this and
part of the standards of care. We just
have to re-evaluate how we use them and
when we use them. So uh this is will be
an emerging field of knowing how to use
the tools that we already have with the
new concepts that we're bringing in. And
this will ultimately move the population
from a fearstricken ca of cancer to
realizing that this is something yeah
it's going to be an inconvenience. You
might have to stop eating this, you have
to do more of that, but at least you can
bring yourself back to some some
semblance of health. Whether you get a
cure or not, I have no clue. uh but uh
at least you're going to be living on
the planet a longer period of time with
a higher quality of life and this is
what we're beginning to see.
>> Now we should be focusing on restricting
cancerous fuels, glucose and glutamine
instead of poisoning ourselves.
>> Yeah, I think so. Um but again, uh we're
going to have to work to bring that
knowledge to the people and they're
going to have to work to know that
themselves. Scientific literacy now
becomes essential.
>> Uh you cannot be a pawn in this. You
can't be herded into like a bunch of
sheep into these clinical trials that
are not going to target glucose and
glutamine. That's the first thing every
cancer should patient should ask their
their caregiver. How is your treatment
going to restrict glucose and glutamine
availability while enhancing the health
and vitality of the rest of my body? And
if you get a person that looks like a
deer in the headlight, you might want to
go somewhere else. So, uh, this has got
the oncologists need to know about this
and they need to work with the patients
to make sure they're they're they're
doing all this the right way for the bea
best outcome of the patient.
>> Yeah. Let's hope we get there and get
there soon and then let's get these
oncologists uh teach some of the
nefologists in PKD and then we can all
uh learn a great deal. I hope.
>> Yeah, I hope so.
>> Yeah.
>> And all the papers are on open access.
you can just look my name up and say
publications and people can read them.
All of what I've spoken about is
published. Um we're working on more
things and um yeah, so thank you and I
hope your your your group can benefit.
I'm excited to see what happens with the
polycystic kidney group. Uh be very
interesting to see the outcome of what
of if they start implementing these
kinds of things. You guys might be the
ones. Who knows?
>> Yeah, I am very excited for it too. Um,
last thing, let people know where, uh,
they can support you.
>> Well, um, we get our all of all of the
funding that we get right now comes from
private foundations and philanthropy.
Um, as I said, there are folks that are
really excited about what we're doing
and they support us. Uh, and there know
they they don't care whether they make
money. They want to know that for
humanitarian purposes, they want to be
part of the movement. And uh uh Travis
Christopherson's Foundation for Cancer
Metabolic Therapy supports our work. We
have some small foundations that support
us. And if people go to my Boston
College web page, there's a donation
link there. They can donate to our
research directly through the university
through Boston College. It's a Jesuit
university here in in uh in in in
Boston. Um so and different from Boston
University. We are not Boston
University. we are Boston College and if
you look on you'll see the two
institutions are quite are quite
different.
>> So um but any event yes so thank you if
if those uh I send kits of information
out to people uh which gives them some
overview of what's going on but I think
once our big treatment protocol is
accepted we will share that with the
world and let people uh everywhere use
this to improve uh overall uh outcome.
>> Is there a time frame for that? Oh god,
I wish I could tell you.
>> Um, but uh it's being reviewed and
there's a big very extensive it's it's a
very extensive treatment protocol
>> um which which we've considered all
kinds of flexibility embodied in the
protocol itself. So uh so reviewers must
look at all the supplementary tables and
other things. So it's going to take some
time but once it's published uh and we
will let the world know that the p that
the uh the the the treatment of cancer
uh according to it's for glyopblasto but
but it's can be used for almost every
cancer because they all they're all
fermenttors um so it will work for the
majority and probably even cystic
polycystic fibrosis um polycystic uh
kidney disease I'm sorry but but but it
it'll work it'll work for the majority
of things. So, uh, we're excited to
hopefully get that out and then, uh,
people will email me and what I'll do is
just send it out and let everybody try
it and see what how it's going to work
and then we'll all get excited hopefully
to see the outcome.
>> We will get a lot of people trying it,
I'm sure.
>> Oh, yeah. You can even if you don't have
cancer, you can try it just to stay
healthy.
>> Yeah. Well, you don't want to limit
glutamine too much in that case.
>> Yeah. No, no, you don't have to
eliminate glutamine too much. Um, but
uh, and we're working on that. We're
working on it all right now. So, it's a
work in progress. Let's put it that way.
>> Amazing. Okay. So, uh I thank you so
much for your time. We've uh already
gone a little bit over. So, uh thanks
for staying with us and um yeah, all the
best over to Boston College. Thank you
so much.
>> Nice speaking with you. Bino.